Okay, congratulations.
You’ve done your first draft.
But of course,
every “congratulations”
goes with “looking forward.”
We call it the first draft
because it’s only natural
and normal to have your second,
third, until your final draft.
There are playwrights who think
they're writing a novel,
and once they get published,
that's it.
As if it were already
set in stone.
Or it's like a poem,
since it’s very personal,
you can’t change anything,
not even a punctuation mark.
That’s how some
of them see a play.
They want to show that
“I’ve thought about this very carefully.”
“Every word and every breath,
so how dare you change it."
I respect those
kinds of playwrights
but I don’t share
the same sentiments.
Firstly and personally,
as a playwright,
one foot is in theater
while the other is in literature.
While you could have
that kind of attitude in literature
but in theater,
you open yourself
through your work
to collaborators,
since they’re the ones
who’ll bring your story to life.
You won't be the one
performing to the audience.
They can only
hear what you wrote.
They will only see the actors,
and how they deliver it
has an effect
on how you wrote it.
There are times when
actors would say,
“I can’t figure this out,
is it alright to do this instead?"
For me, that’s part
of the writing process
of a playwright.
It means that once
you’ve done your first draft,
it needs to be rehearsed.
It needs to be produced.
The journey from the first draft
until the production draft,
is an arduous one.
And revising
is naturally also a part of it.
I’m not saying you have to do
everything the director says,
especially if they’re well-known.
I'm also not saying
you need to accept
everything right away,
like when an actor tells you
she can’t pronounce a word,
you have to weigh the importance
of the words you wrote,
especially if it’s to the point
where you can’t just change the lines
to accommodate your actors.
That's not all.
During the first reading,
it needs to be read publicly.
When I say publicly,
by the production team.
This is where you’ll first hear
your work read aloud by others,
which means they
can interpret it differently.
This may give you new ideas
on how you’ll change the lines.
Aside from that,
when you hear it read by others,
you’ll realize then
if it works or not.
Because if it doesn't work,
no matter how serious, earnest,
and dedicated you were in planning it,
it may still be lacking something.
And you should be open to that.
Ideally, this is where
the director helps you.
I know there are different
kinds of directors,
some could be
terrifying and so on.
But in an ideal world,
the director’s purpose
is to show you how
your story can come to life
and how to enhance it.
This is where
the element of trust comes in
in terms of choosing
people to work with.
I cannot emphasize
enough the importance
of revisions during rehearsals,
readings, and even 'til production.
Even if there’s no rehearsal
or if you’re just about to rehearse,
It’s important for you
to hear people read it aloud
and it’s also good
to hear their opinions about it.
I’m not saying you have
to accept all their opinions.
Filter it.
Why is it important?
Because the play you wrote
wasn't written to be read,
but to be heard.
And to be heard in theater means
an audience watches it collectively.
They’re sitting side by side.
And they react collectively as well.
The response
in theater is immediate,
especially during its release.
That’s how you’ll measure
how successful your show is.
I’m not talking
about the ticket sales,
I’m talking about
the reaction of the audience.
Listen to it
and compare it
to your objectives.
Then compare it
to your honest-to-goodness
view of your own play.
When you tally that,
you’ll see if you
should revise it or not.
But more often than not,
in my experience,
I still revise it—
not because I blindly follow them.
There are just instances
during production that I disagree with.
And anyway, what I wrote
still comes back to me.
Once the show's over,
it's also over for production.
While the play I wrote
is still with me.
And there’s a possibility
that it could be staged again
or be published
using my own version.
So that’s the life of a play.
Like what Joseph Conrad said,
“A work is never finished,
it is only abandoned.”
I want to view the writing process
of any form in that way,
but especially in writing a play.
It’s never done for me.
I’m only abandoning it
because I’m writing another play.
From the point of view of revising,
there are two important things:
to hear someone
read it aloud 'til it’s shown
and to listen to yourself.
Be honest to yourself
so you can weigh on how
you’ll change your work.
Nevertheless, if you’ve done
your first draft, I salute you.